AAAI 2022
AAAI 2022
AAAI 2022
AAAI 2022
ICASSP 2022

Master Thesis 2021
A Research of Information Diffusion Models and Popularity Prediction Using Graph Neural Networks
With the rapid development of the Internet and mobile devices, understanding in­ network information diffusion in social networks attracts much attention in both academia and industry, becoming a fundamental research problem in many real­ world applications of social network analysis. Popularity prediction aims to predict the final diffusion range or size after observing the early­ stage evolution of the information cascade. How to accu­rately predict the popularity of the information cascade in complex, rapidly evolved, and vulnerable to be influenced information network becomes one of the most challenging problems in this field. Most of the existing prediction models rely either on hypothesized stochastic processes, artificially designed feature engineering, or end­-to­-end deep neural networks. These models achieved some extent of success in information cascade pop­ularity prediction, however, facing several notable challenges: (1) only consider the lo­ cal structures of information cascades, they cannot simultaneously capture the underlying global and local structures; (2) use simple temporal or structural modeling techniques, they cannot jointly model these characteristics in hierarchy; (3) cannot capture the variations and uncertainties in information diffusion; (4) they cannot utilize unlabeled information cascade data; (5) existing data augmentation techniques cannot be implemented in infor­mation cascade graphs; (6) they rely on massive labeled data, which generalizes poorly; (7) the learned information cascade representations cannot be transferred across different information cascade datasets and prediction tasks. In order to address challenges (1­-3), we propose CasFlow, which is a probabilistic popularity prediction framework based on graph neural network and variational inference. It conducts non­linear hierarchical analysis on information cascade graphs and models the variations and uncertainties of information diffusion in social networks. CasFlow allows efficient information diffusion inference and models the diffusion process by learning the latent representations of both temporal and structural characteristics of information cas­cade graphs. CasFlow is a pattern­-agnostic model leveraging the variational auto­encoders and normalizing flows to learn node­-level and cascade­-level latent influence factors and uncertainties. CasFlow has a better prediction performance and robustness. In addition, to address the challenges (4­-7), we propose CCGL, which is a prediction model based on graph contrastive self­-supervised learning. In particular, it first learns general representations of information cascade graphs by a task­-agnostic contrastive self­ supervised pre­-training on both labeled and unlabeled data. Then it fine­-tunes the model by utilizing labeled data in a task­-specific manner. It finally uses a teacher­-student network for knowledge distilling and transfer learning, which effectively address the "negative transfer" issue. CCGL model simulates the diffusion process of information in social net­ works and designs a novel data augmentation strategy AugSIM for information cascade graph. CCGL can effectively alleviate the overfitting problem when training on small datasets, and possesses a better generalization capability. CCGL can learn general knowl­edge from information cascade data, the learned knowledge can be transferred to other information cascade datasets and prediction tasks for performance improvements. The "unsupervised pre­-training, fine­-tuning, and knowledge distilling" paradigm of CCGL is a promising direction for the design of future information cascade prediction models. At last, this thesis conducts extensive experimental evaluations in several public large­-caled information cascade datasets. Compared to state­-of­-the­-art baselines, both of the proposed prediction models decreased the prediction errors significantly.

TKDE 2022
CCGL: Contrastive Cascade Graph Learning
Supervised learning, while prevalent for information cascade modeling, often requires abundant labeled data in training, and the trained model is not easy to generalize across tasks and datasets. Semi-supervised learning facilitates unlabeled data for cascade understanding in pre-training. It often learns fine-grained feature-level representations, which can easily result in overfitting for downstream tasks. Recently, contrastive self-supervised learning is designed to alleviate these two fundamental issues in linguistic and visual tasks. However, its direct applicability for cascade modeling, especially graph cascade related tasks, remains underexplored. In this work, we present Contrastive Cascade Graph Learning (CCGL), a novel framework for cascade graph representation learning in a contrastive, self-supervised, and task-agnostic way. In particular, CCGL first designs an effective data augmentation strategy to capture variation and uncertainty. Second, it learns a generic model for graph cascade tasks via self-supervised contrastive pre-training using both unlabeled and labeled data. Third, CCGL learns a task-specific cascade model via fine-tuning using labeled data. Finally, to make the model transferable across datasets and cascade applications, CCGL further enhances the model via distillation using a teacher-student architecture. We demonstrate that CCGL significantly outperforms its supervised and semi-supervised counterparts for several downstream tasks.

KBS 2022
Heterogeneous dynamical academic network for learning scientific impact propagation
Quantifying and predicting the long-term impact of both scientific papers and individual authors have important implications for many academic policy decisions, from identifying emerging trends to assessing the merits of proposals for potential funding. This paper presents SI-HDGNN, a novel heterogeneous dynamical graph neural network that explicitly models a heterogeneous, weighted, directed and attributed academic graph, enabling a prediction of the cumulative scientific impact of papers and authors by a specifically designed aggregation method. Unlike the existing feature-based or homogeneous approaches, SI-HDGNN addresses the problem by capturing the temporal–structural characteristics of the papers and authors as well as their complex interactions and long-term dependencies. Extensive experiments conducted on three large-scale multidisciplinary academic datasets demonstrate its superior performance in predicting the long-term scientific impact of both scientific papers and authors.

ACM TIST 2022
Contrastive Trajectory Learning for Tour Recommendation
The main objective of Personalized Tour Recommendation (PTR) is to generate a sequence of point-of-interest (POIs) for a particular tourist, according to the user-specific constraints such as duration time, start and end points, the number of attractions planned to visit, and so on. Previous PTR solutions are based on either heuristics for solving the orienteering problem to maximize a global reward with a specified budget or approaches attempting to learn user visiting preferences and transition patterns with the stochastic process or recurrent neural networks. However, existing learning methodologies rely on historical trips to train the model and use the next visited POI as the supervised signal, which may not fully capture the coherence of preferences and thus recommend similar trips to different users, primarily due to the data sparsity problem and long-tailed distribution of POI popularity. This work presents a novel tour recommendation model by distilling knowledge and supervision signals from the trips in a self-supervised manner. We propose Contrastive Trajectory Learning for Tour Recommendation (CTLTR), which utilizes the intrinsic POI dependencies and traveling intent to discover extra knowledge and augments the sparse data via pre-training auxiliary self-supervised objectives. CTLTR provides a principled way to characterize the inherent data correlations while tackling the implicit feedback and weak supervision problems by learning robust representations applicable for tour planning. We introduce a hierarchical recurrent encoder-decoder to identify tourists’ intentions and use the contrastive loss to discover subsequence semantics and their sequential patterns through maximizing the mutual information. Additionally, we observe that a data augmentation step as the preliminary of contrastive learning can solve the overfitting issue resulting from data sparsity. We conduct extensive experiments on a range of real-world datasets and demonstrate that our model can significantly improve the recommendation performance over the state-of-the-art baselines in terms of both recommendation accuracy and visiting orders.

GLOBECOM 2021
HGENA: A Hyperbolic Graph Embedding Approach for Network Alignment
Cross-network alignment aims at identifying users who participate in different social networks, which benefits a variety of downstream social applications such as precise content delivery, fraud detection, and content/user recommender systems. Recent advances in network representations and graph neural networks have spurred various network structure-based methods for capturing underlying node similarities across social networks, thereby addressing the network alignment problem. However, most of the existing solutions rely on embedding methods that compute node similarity in Euclidean space, resulting in severe distortion or semantic loss when representing real-world social networks, which are usually scale free and with hierarchical structures. We address these issues by presenting a novel model: Hyperbolic Graph Embedding for Network Alignment (HGENA), which learns the structural semantics more efficiently by embedding nodes in hyperbolic space instead of Euclidean. HGENA overcomes the scalability issue since it requires far fewer dimensions in Riemannian manifolds and increases the capability of learning hierarchical structures, while enabling smaller distortion for tree-liked networks to facilitate node alignment. We also introduce alternative network mapping functions to compute node similarity across-network based on its distance on the Poincare ball. Experimental evaluations conducted on real world datasets demonstrate that HGENA achieves superior performance on social network alignment, especially for more tree-liked networks.

TKDE 2021
CasFlow: Exploring Hierarchical Structures and Propagation Uncertainty for Cascade Prediction
Understanding in-network information diffusion is a fundamental problem in many applications and one of the primary challenges is to predict the information cascade size. Most of the existing models rely either on hypothesized point process (e.g., Poisson and Hawkes processes), or simply predict the information propagation via deep neural networks. However, they fail to simultaneously capture the underlying global and local structures of a cascade and the propagation uncertainty in the diffusion, which may result in unsatisfactory prediction performance. To address these, in this work we propose a novel probabilistic cascade prediction framework: Hierarchical Cascade Normalizing Flows (CasFlow). CasFlow allows a non-linear information diffusion inference and models the information diffusion process by learning the latent representation of both the structural and temporal information. It is a pattern-agnostic model leveraging normalizing flows to learn the node-level and cascade-level latent factors in an unsupervised manner. In addition, CasFlow is capable of capturing both the cascade representation uncertainty and node infection uncertainty, while enabling hierarchical pattern learning of information diffusion. Extensive experiments conducted on real-world datasets demonstrate that CasFlow reduces the prediction error to 21.0% by only observing half an hour of cascades, compared to state-of-the-art approaches, while also enabling model interpretability.

CIKM 2021
Vector-Quantized Autoencoder With Copula for Collaborative Filtering
In theory, the variational auto-encoder (VAE) is not suitable for recommendation tasks, although it has been successfully utilized for collaborative filtering (CF) models. In this paper, we propose a Gaussian Copula-Vector Quantized Autoencoder (GC-VQAE) model that differs prior arts in two key ways: (1) Gaussian Copula helps to model the dependencies among latent variables which are used to construct a more complex distribution compared with the mean-field theory; and (2) by incorporating a vector quantisation method into encoders our model can learn discrete representations which are consistent with the observed data rather than directly sampling from the simple Gaussian distributions. Our approach is able to circumvent the "posterior collapse'' issue and break the prior constraint to improve the flexibility of latent vector encoding and learning ability. Empirically, GC-VQAE can significantly improve the recommendation performance compared to existing state-of-the-art methods.

SIGIR 2021
Decoupling Representation and Regressor for Long-Tailed Information Cascade Prediction
Effectively predicting the size of information cascades is crucial for understanding the evolution of many social applications, such as influence maximization and fake news detection. Conventional methods face the challenge of data imbalance which, in turn, yields unsatisfactory prediction performance. To prevent the loss functions or metrics from being affected by extreme values and assure numerical stability, previous works reformulate the problem definitions or adopt other types of evaluation metrics. However, solving the regression prediction of information cascades from a long-tailed distribution perspective is under explored. In this paper, we propose a general decoupling prediction solution -- first extracting the representation, then fine-tuning the regressor, which combines the original prediction value and weighted bias generated by a sub-network (SUB) that we designed. Our experiments conducted on long-tailed benchmarks demonstrate that our method significantly improves the prediction accuracy over state-of-the-art methods and mitigates the long-tailed cascade prediction problem.

CSUR 2021
A Survey of Information Cascade Analysis: Models, Predictions, and Recent Advances
The deluge of digital information in our daily life—from user-generated content, such as microblogs and scientific papers, to online business, such as viral marketing and advertising—offers unprecedented opportunities to explore and exploit the trajectories and structures of the evolution of information cascades. Abundant research efforts, both academic and industrial, have aimed to reach a better understanding of the mechanisms driving the spread of information and quantifying the outcome of information diffusion. This article presents a comprehensive review and categorization of information popularity prediction methods, from feature engineering and stochastic processes, through graph representation, to deep learning-based approaches. Specifically, we first formally define different types of information cascades and summarize the perspectives of existing studies. We then present a taxonomy that categorizes existing works into the aforementioned three main groups as well as the main subclasses in each group, and we systematically review cutting-edge research work. Finally, we summarize the pros and cons of existing research efforts and outline the open challenges and opportunities in this field.

GLOBECOM 2020
Meta-Learned User Preference for Topic Participation Prediction
Predicting the potential user interest on topics in online social networks is important for many practical applications such as advertising, recommendation and malicious account identification. Previous methods on such topic prediction problem mainly focus on learning user preference from historical posting content, and/or rely on the interest of friends to infer the topics a user may be interested in. However, these methods fail to take full advantage of high-order interactions between users and topics and the implicit relations among users, which may result in limited performance. In addition, existing approaches usually require a large amount of samples to train the model and therefore have poor prediction performance for the users who have few content and/or rarely follow the topics. To overcome these limitations, we present a novel method MetaTP (Meta learning based Topic Prediction) for exploiting the complex preference of users over the topics and identify the potential topics for cold-start users. MetaTP is built on a fast graph convolutional network to estimate the user interest through extracting user posting behavior from historical posting content and recursively aggregating the interest from the social friends of a user. Moreover, MetaTP introduces a new way of training prediction model in a meta-learning manner, which not only improves the performance on topic prediction but also can effectively and efficiently adapt to users with a few records. We validate our MetaTP model on real-world datasets crawled from popular social platforms and the empirical results show that our approach significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art baselines.

GLOBECOM 2020
Unsupervised User Identity Linkage via Graph Neural Networks
User identity linkage (UIL) aims to link identical users engaging in multiple social networks. It has received considerable attention in both academia and industry due to its profound implications for multiple applications. Although existing approaches have achieved promising progress in UIL using various graph learning methods, they usually require a large number of labeled anchor nodes which, however, are difficult to obtain in real-world social platforms due to privacy issues. We introduce a novel UIL model NWUIL (Network Wasserstein learning for UIL) to identify anchor users across social networks in a fully unsupervised manner. Instead of point vector embedding of nodes as in previous methods, NWUIL captures node distribution in Wasserstein space with graph neural networks. We also propose to reformulate the UIL task as an optimal network transport problem, and then introduce an unsupervised mapping process based on the network Wasserstein distance for UIL. In this way, our method not only improves the anchor node aligning accuracy but also alleviates the issues caused by insufficient labeled anchor nodes. We conduct extensive experiments using real-world datasets, and demonstrate that NWUIL significantly outperforms existing unsupervised baselines while showing competitive performance as some state-of-the-art supervised approaches.

GLOBECOM 2020
Continual Information Cascade Learning
Modeling the information diffusion process is an essential step towards understanding the mechanisms driving the success of information. Existing methods either exploit various features associated with cascades to study the underlying factors governing information propagation, or leverage graph representation techniques to model the diffusion process in an end-to-end manner. Current solutions are only valid for a static and fixed observation scenario and fail to handle increasing observations due to the challenge of catastrophic forgetting problems inherent in the machine learning approaches used for modeling and predicting cascades. To remedy this issue, we propose a novel dynamic information diffusion model CICP (Continual Information Cascades Prediction). CICP employs graph neural networks for modeling information diffusion and continually adapts to increasing observations. It is capable of capturing the correlations between successive observations while preserving the important parameters regarding cascade evolution and transition. Experiments conducted on real-world cascade datasets demonstrate that our method not only improves the prediction performance with accumulated data but also prevents the model from forgetting previously trained tasks.

arXiv 2020
A Heterogeneous Dynamical Graph Neural Networks Approach to Quantify Scientific Impact
Quantifying and predicting the long-term impact of scientific writings or individual scholars has important implications for many policy decisions, such as funding proposal evaluation and identifying emerging research fields. In this work, we propose an approach based on Heterogeneous Dynamical Graph Neural Network (HDGNN) to explicitly model and predict the cumulative impact of papers and authors. HDGNN extends heterogeneous GNNs by incorporating temporally evolving characteristics and capturing both structural properties of attributed graph and the growing sequence of citation behavior. HDGNN is significantly different from previous models in its capability of modeling the node impact in a dynamic manner while taking into account the complex relations among nodes. Experiments conducted on a real citation dataset demonstrate its superior performance of predicting the impact of both papers and authors.

INFOCOM 2020
Variational Information Diffusion for Probabilistic Cascades Prediction
Understanding in-network information diffusion is a fundamental problem in many application domains and one of the primary challenges is to predict the size of the information cascade. Most of the existing models rely either on hypothesized point process (e.g., Poisson and Hawkes process), or simply predict the information propagation via deep neural networks. However, they fail to simultaneously capture the underlying structure of a cascade graph and the propagation of uncertainty in the diffusion, which may result in unsatisfactory prediction performance. To address these, in this work we propose a novel probabilistic cascade prediction framework: Variational Cascade (VaCas) graph learning networks. VaCas allows a non-linear information diffusion inference and models the information diffusion process by learning the latent representation of both the structural and temporal information. It is a pattern-agnostic model leveraging variational inference to learn the node-level and cascade-level latent factors in an unsupervised manner. In addition, VaCas is capable of capturing both the cascade representation uncertainty and node infection uncertainty, while enabling hierarchical pattern learning of information diffusion. Extensive experiments conducted on real-world datasets demonstrate that VaCas significantly improves the prediction accuracy, compared to state-of-the-art approaches, while also enabling interpretability.